
## Genomic signatures of inbreeding depression for a threatened Aotearoa New Zealand passerine

Here, we investigate inbreeding and inbreeding depression for hihi (*Notiomystis cincta*). Firstly, using a custom 45k SNP array, we explore genomic inbreeding patterns by inferring homozygous segments across the genome. Secondly, we measure genomic inbreeding effects on fitness, measured as lifetime reproductive success, and its three components, annual reproductive success, juvenile survival and adult annual survival, in 363 hihi. This manuscript has been submittee for publication and is currently being peer-reviewed.

#### Genotyping and data filtering
In 2016, 1,536 hihi from five different populations were genotyped using a custom 50k Affymetrix single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array (Lee et al., 2022). This array was developed based on the identification of SNPs from de novo assembly of restriction site-associated DNA sequencing (RAD-seq) of 31 individuals from the Te Hauturu-o-Toi and Tiritiri Mātangi populations, and low-coverage whole-genome sequencing of ten of these birds (three of which were from Tiritiri Mātangi). SNPs were selected for approximately even genome spacing by mapping SNP positions from the highly fragmented assemblies to the zebra finch genome. Of the 58,466 SNPs included on the array, 45,553 markers passed initial quality control metrics in the Axiom Analysis Suite software and PLINK (Purcell et al., 2007) filtering for minor allele frequency and Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (--maf 0.01, --hwe 1e-20). In 2021, those SNPs were mapped to contigs for a draft hihi reference genome (version NotCin10.4) and those genome contigs were then scaffolded into chromosomes based on homology to zebra finch and the hihi linkage map (manuscript in preparation). With sex chromosome positions removed, this resulted in a final dataset of 41,195 SNPs with high-confidence assignment to 31 chromosomes covering 86% of the total estimated genome size of 1.06Gb (manuscript in preparation).

#### ROH-based inbreeding in hihi
Inbreeding was measured from the SNP data using the hidden Markov model-based approach in the R (R Core Team, 2013) package RZooRoH (Bertrand et al., 2019) that identifies homozygous-by-decent (HBD) segments (Druet & Gautier, 2017) and allows for the estimation of a global inbreeding coefficient. RZooRoH differs from some other inferences of ROH by providing a quantitative probability of a SNP being within an ROH, rather than a binary presence/absence, and therefore better captures uncertainty in ROH inference (Druet & Gautier, 2017; Bertrand et al., 2019). In a previous hihi study, we evaluated several models for the number of age-related HBD classes (K-1; the final class represents non-HBD) by varying K from 4 to 13, while allowing for a genotyping error rate of 0.25% (Ferenčaković et al., 2013) and including a new option that improves the partitioning at higher inbreeding levels (layers=TRUE). The 13-class model was determined to be the best fit for hihi (Tom Druet, personal communication; Duntsch et al., 2021). Hence, the RZooRoH models for this study were fitted with the same rates as our previous study (of 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 100, 200, 500, 600, 700, 1000, 2000, 2000, where the final 2000 is the non-HBD class). When divided by two, these rates give an approximation of generation time since the most recent common ancestor for the segment falling into this HBD class (Bertrand et al., 2019). For each individual, HBD probabilities were summed over the first ten HBD classes (excluding HBD classes eleven (rate 1000) and twelve (rate 2000) that did not yield any HBD probabilities for the selected individuals) to give individual inbreeding coefficients (FROH) for all birds. 
We further divided the whole-genome inbreeding level into very recent, middle and ancient inbreeding (Frec, Fmid, Fanc). Very recent inbreeding Frec includes HBD class 1 (up to 10/2 = 5 generations), middle inbreeding Fmid includes the sum across HBD classes 2-6 (between 5 and 50 generations) and ancient inbreeding Fanc includes the sum across HBD classes 7-10 (between 50 and 350 generations). In more detail, Frec includes homozygous segments that originated from inbreeding that happened since the 1990s, or since 5 generations ago, given the generation time of hihi of approximately 4.2 years as calculated from the pedigree. This interval therefore includes the year of the first two hihi translocations of 51 birds from Te Hauturu-o-Toi to Tiritiri Mātangi (in 1995 (38 birds) and 1996 (13 birds); of these 51, only 21 survived to breed; Armstrong et al., 2002) and hence very recent and significant bottleneck events (Brekke et al., 2011). In addition, this first time point was chosen as it is most likely recent inbreeding events that have an effect on fitness (Makanjuola et al., 2020). Secondly, middle inbreeding Fmid was defined as the fraction of the whole-genome inbreeding level that captures hihi dynamics after European arrival in Aotearoa New Zealand. More precisely, the Fmid interval incorporates inbreeding levels accumulated between the time of the first European settlement in Aotearoa in 1822 and the start of the re-introductions of hihi to other islands and the mainland. Hihi were last seen on the mainland in 1883, and after cats and rats had led to a demise of hihi in the only remnant population on Te Hauturu-o-Toi, the island was declared a predator-free sanctuary in 1980 (Rasch et al., 1996). Lastly, Fanc reflects hihi inbreeding more than 50 generations (~200 years) ago and hence is associated with the time before Europeans settled on the North Island, including Māori arrival (~1250, Supplementary Figure S1). Finally, we identified birds with very high and very low global inbreeding FROH and investigated the contribution of each of the HBD classes to their overall inbreeding coefficient, and their ROH density on a chromosome level.
We note that a probability-based RZooRoH approach will, on average, yield higher inbreeding values than binary estimates that are offered e.g. by PLINK (Meyermans et al., 2020), but our previous work indicates that these values are highly correlated for hihi (Duntsch et al., 2021; also confirmed herein for this set of birds by calculating genome wide inbreeding from PLINK, Supplementary Figure S2). As there is considerable variation in recombination rates across the macrochromosomes start-to-end, as well as sex differences in recombination rate for hihi (average recombination is 2.56 cM/Mb, manuscript in preparation), we present results in Mb using default RZooRoH functions and plots. The terms HBD and ROH are used interchangeably, and always refer to aspects of the RZooRoH output.

##### ROH density across the population
We measured the average ROH density across the genome for all 363 hihi individuals by extracting all HBD segments per chromosome in RZooRoH and estimating mean HBD probabilities of all markers in non-overlapping 500kb windows using the R package windowscanr (Tavares, 2021), following R code provided by Stoffel et al. (2021a). In our dataset, the average marker density is 20 SNPs per 500kb window. 

#### Modelling inbreeding depression, age and sex effects

##### Important hihi fitness traits
The long-term study of the Tiritiri Mātangi population means that fitness, measured as lifetime reproductive success, is available for all individuals (de Villemereuil et al., 2019). Lifetime reproductive success represents the total number of banded offspring a banded individual had, and hence measures reproductive success across one life cycle, from banding to banding. In determining the impact of both genome-wide and region-specific inbreeding depression, we also partitioned lifetime reproductive success into three components: two annual fitness components - annual reproductive success and adult annual survival - and juvenile survival. The repeated measure of annual reproductive success describes the number of banded offspring a bird had in each breeding season. In addition, adult annual survival is a repeated measure that reflects whether a bird was seen alive in any given year based on the twice-yearly census data. The final trait under investigation is juvenile survival, a trait that describes whether a bird survived for more than two census counts, which roughly equals one calendar year from February to February.

##### MCMCglmm modelling
The effects of whole-genome genomic inbreeding (FROH), sex and lifespan on lifetime reproductive success (LRS), the effects of inbreeding, age and sex on annual reproductive success (ARS) and the effects of genomic inbreeding and sex on juvenile and adult annual survival (JUS, ADS) were tested using MCMCglmm (Hadfield, 2010), an R package that fits generalised linear mixed models using Markov chain Monte Carlo techniques. For LRS, fixed predictors included sex (male/female), total lifespan (in years) and whole-genome inbreeding FROH and the interaction between sex and FROH, while random effects included the breeding season in which bird was born (birth cohort) and the mother. LRS was fitted with a Zero inflated Poisson error distribution following de Villemereuil et al. (2019). For ARS, fixed effects of sex, FROH and age2 (to reflect observed senescence in reproductive success) and their interactions were fitted, along with random effects of birth cohort, mother, ID and year. ARS was fitted with a Poisson error distribution. Finally, both annual adult survival (ADS) and juvenile survival (JUS) were fitted with interacting fixed effects of FROH  and sex, random effects of birth cohort, mother and ID, and a binomial error distribution (“threshold” family in MCMCglmm). Further, the ADS model random effects also included the year. 
We also fitted additional models with the separated inbreeding values (Frec, Fmid, Fanc), as very recent and middle inbreeding (Frec and Fmid) seemed to contribute most to inbreeding levels in highly inbred birds. All Bayesian models were run for 500,000 iterations after a burn-in period of 3,000, sampling every 20th output from the chain, a setting that resulted in a high minimal effective sample size for almost all fixed (>20,000) and random (>5,000) effects. Convergence was checked graphically and with the Heidelberger and Welch convergence test using the coda R package (Heidelberger & Welch, 1981; Plummer et al., 2006). We also fit all models above without interaction terms, and models of additive versus interaction fixed effects were compared with the deviance information criterion (DIC).

#### ROH genome wide association scan (GWAS)
We also used the list of identified HBD-segments larger than 300kb from the RZooRoH analysis to test for association between an allele of a SNP being in a ROH and hihi fitness. Following the framework of Stoffel et al. (2021a), for each SNP we fitted a mixed model of association with fixed effects for each of the two SNP alleles and whether they were homozygous and in a ROH or not. The resulting p-values for the two predictors at each locus indicate whether a SNP in a ROH for specific allele is significantly associated with the trait, i.e., lifetime reproductive success, annual reproductive success, juvenile survival or adult survival. In addition to the two SNP allele effects, the top seven principal components of the variance-standardised additive relationship matrix (PC1–7) were fitted as fixed effects, in lieu of an additive genetic effect (although we note that these additive genetic effects are very small for hihi, see de Villemereuil et al., 2019). The remaining fixed and random predictors were included as selected from the best models from the above MCMCglmm analysis. Mixed models were fitted with the glmer function from the lme4 package (Bates et al., 2014). Both LRS and ARS glmer models were run with a Poisson error distribution and the ADS and JUS models were run using the binomial distribution (de Villemereuil et al., 2019). The conservative Bonferroni corrected threshold for genome-wide significance was calculated using the common significance value p of 0.05 (Duntsch et al., 2020). All R scripts and models regarding this mapping of inbreeding depression are modified from Stoffel et al. (2021a) unless otherwise indicated, and can be found in the data availability section of their publication together with a detailed description of their methods.


